Day 1 - Biology
Mihit Sai Garlanka & Aditya Chebrolu

Scientific Method
The scientific method is simply a process that can be used for research and experimentation. It outlines a set of systematic guidelines to explore observations and answer questions based on a scientific hypothesis. 

Identify the Problem
Gather observations and make inferences based on them
Come up with a possible question that can be answered with the scientific method

Formulate a Hypothesis
Perform research on the chosen question to be answered
Based on the gathered information, generate a proper solution to the problem
Make an educated guess (hypothesis) using the if… then… statement
Perform the Experiment
Outline a step-by-step procedure to be followed in the experiment
Make sure you test the hypothesis!
Repeat the experiment 3 times for 3 trials
Make Conclusion(s)
Summarize results
State if the hypothesis was accepted or rejected
Share your results to the scientific community!
Collect and Analyze Data
Use graphs/tables/figures to represent the data more easily
Explain why you think you got a certain outcome


Variables
Variables are factors in a scientific experiment that can exist in different amounts or types. The four types of variables are listed below:



Independent Variable

The independent variable that is changed in a scientific experiment to test the effects on the dependent variable.
Dependent Variable

The dependent variable is the variable that is tested and measured in a scientific experiment.
Control Variable

The control variable is not changed in an experiment as a reference point to test the validity of the independent variable.
Constants

Constants remain the same throughout the entire experiment to reduce the effect of external factors on the experiment.

Questions 1-4

Taxonomy
Taxonomy is simply the discipline of classifying organisms, or living things, and assigning each a universally accepted name. 
There are 8 levels of taxonomy organizing all organisms into a hierarchy based on their physical similarities and molecular homologies:

Most Broad or Generalized
Most specific
Dear
King
Philip
Came
Over
For
Good
Soup

Binomial Nomenclature
Carolus Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist, developed a two-word naming system for all species on earth called binomial nomenclature. 

The format for binomial nomenclature is:

Genus species


Examples:
Canis latrans (Coyote)
Canis lupus (Gray Wolf)

Do you know the binomial nomenclature for humans?
Homo sapiens




Always underlined or italicized
1st Letter is Capitalized
All letters lowercase

Practice Problem #1












What is the binomial nomenclature name for the above organism?





Vulpes vulpes

Questions 5-8

Body Systems
Our body is made of 11 systems that work together to maintain homeostasis, in which the body maintains stable and steady conditions. 
These systems are:
Digestive
Circulatory
Immune
Endocrine
Muscular	





Nervous			Reproductive
Excretory 
Respiratory
Skeletal
Integumentary


The Digestive System
The digestive system converts food into energy and basic nutrients to feed the entire body. The pathway for the digestive system is:
Food → mouth (saliva) → esophagus → stomach → small intestine → large intestine → anus/rectum





Mouth: begins mechanical digestion with chewing and chemical with amylase
Stomach: acid digestion of protein
Small intestine:  enzymes from pancreas and liver connect; nutrients are absorbed
Large intestine:  water is absorbed
Anus: undigested material is expelled


Types of Digestion
There are 2 types of digestion, mechanical digestion and chemical digestion, which will be looked at below: 
In mechanical digestion, food is broken into smaller pieces in a physical manner. Mechanical digestion primarily occurs in the mouth when the food is chewed with teeth.
In chemical digestion, food is broken down into simpler nutrients that can be used by cells. Chemical digestion occurs in the mouth with saliva, as well as in the stomach with gastric acid.
It is important to note that, in chemical digestion, food molecules are broken down by adding water. This process is known as hydrolysis. These small molecules are then constructed again to form larger molecules with the removal of water to maintain homeostasis. This process is known as dehydration synthesis.






Circulatory/Cardiovascular System
The circulatory, or cardiovascular system, is analogous to the roads and highways in the body. It transports nutrients, wastes, hormones, and gases through the blood from one part of the body to another.
The heart is the organ which allows the pumping of blood in the circulatory system, therefore allowing for the transport of the aforementioned substances.






Circulatory System

Also known as cardiovascular system
Transports nutrients, wastes, hormones and gases 
Types of vessels:
Arteries (away)
Arterioles (smaller, away)
Capillaries (smallest vessels)
Venules(smaller, towards)
Veins (toward)

Nervous System
•Regulates behavior 
•Maintains homeostasis
•Regulates other organ systems    
•Controls sensory and motor functions

Central Nervous System and Peripheral Nervous System
Two parts are the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous.
CNS contains the brain and the spinal cord. All together, the brain and the spinal cord serve the nervous system's command station. When the sensory input reaches the CNS, the spinal cord and the brain figure outs what it exactly means. After, they quickly orders out the body parts that needs to move faster. 
Peripheral nervous system
contains the nerves, which leave the brain and the spinal cord and travel to certain areas of the body
main job is to send information gathered by the body's sensory receptors to the CNS as quickly as possible. 
Once the CNS has understood the information, the PNS will relay the specific orders back out the body. 

Excretory System
removes excess, unnecessary materials from the body fluids of an organism to help maintain internal chemical homeostasis 


Kidneys → Ureter → Bladder → Urethra


Respiratory System
Moves air into and out of lungs
Controls gas exchange between blood and lungs

Skeletal System
Protects and supports the body and its organs; interacts with skeletal muscles; produces red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets
Allows for movement
Contains 206 individual bones
Axial skeleton (80 bones)
Skull, spine, ribs, sternum
Appendicular skeleton (126 bones)
Arms, legs, pelvis, shoulders


Muscular System	
Responsible for movement of human body 
3 Types of Muscles
Smooth - forms the supporting tissue of blood vessels and hollow internal organs, such as the stomach, intestine, and bladder
Cardiac - an involuntary muscle that constitutes the main tissue of the walls of the heart.
Skeletal - attached to bones by bundles of collagen fibers known as tendons

Endocrine System
Regulates body activities with hormones

Glands - responsible for making hormones
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Thyroid 
Long term defense system

Immune System
protects against disease
detect a wide variety of agents, known as pathogens
Lymphatic system is part of it

Immune System Continued
Stores and carries WBC’s that fight disease
Collects excess fluid and returns it to blood
Lymph - liquid part of blood plasma when it is in lymph vessels
Main Components
Lymph Vessels
Lymph Nodes
WBC 
	

Integumentary System
Organ system consisting of the skin, hair, and nails
Largest organ in the body, The average person’s skin weights 10 pounds
Forms a barrier to protect the body from chemicals, disease, UV light, and physical damage

Helps regulate body temp
Removes excretory waste through sweat
Produces Vitamin D

Homeostasis and Feedback Mechanisms
Homeostasis -  Regulation of an organism internal condition, usually by a    ____________ system of  feedback mechanisms

Feedback mechanisms (Positive and negative) - stabilizes health and body functions regardless of the outside changing conditions



Feedback Mechanism
Initiation event (homeostatic disruption) - causes a change in the environment
Stimulus
Receptor (sensor) - senses the stimulus and sends signals to the control center indicating a change
Control center (homeostasis monitor) - detects if the system is within or outside of homeostatic balance and either turns off or activates the effector
Response - causes a change in the environment opposite of the original change

Questions 9-26

Plants

Plant Characteristics
Multicellular
Autotrophic (photosynthesis)
Surrounded by cell walls containing cellulose (polysaccharide)
Store reserve food as (starch)


Taxonomy
Plants are divided into two groups
Based on the presence or absence of an internal transport system for water and dissolved materials
Called Vascular System

Vascular System
Xylem tissue carries water and minerals upward from the roots
Phloem tissue carries sugars made by photosynthesis from the leaves to where they will be stored or used
Sap is the fluid carried inside the xylem or phloem
Examples: Sunflowers, Oak Trees, Daisies

Non-vascular System
Do not have vascular tissue for support or conduction of materials
No roots, stems or leaves
Require a constantly moist environment

Non-Vascular Plants

Cell must be in direct contact with water.
Materials move by diffusion cell to cell; 
Have hair like structures that anchor them to the rocks.


Non-Vascular Plants
Includes  mosses, liverworts, and hornworts

Liverworts
Hornworts

Vascular Plants
Subdivided into two groups -- Seedless vascular plants and Seed-bearing vascular plants


Liverworts
Hornworts

36
Seedless Vascular Plants
Includes club moss, horsetails, whisk ferns, and ferns
Have underground stem called a rhizome.
Reproduce by spores.
Horsetails
Whisk ferns

37
Seed-Bearing Vascular Plants
Includes two groups – Gymnosperms and Angiosperms
Gymnosperms have naked seeds in cones (do not produce fruit) 
Angiosperms have flowers that produce seeds to attract pollinators.

38
Gymnosperms
Wind pollinated
Contains the tallest living plant – Sequoia or redwood

39
Angiosperms
Flowering plants
Seeds are enclosed in a fruit
Most are pollinated by birds and bees
Examples: grasses, tulips, 
   oaks, dandelions

Questions 27-31

Photosynthesis
process by which plants produce food

water
carbon dioxide
oxygen
glucose
TAKE IN
AND USING
MAKE
PLANTS
(producers)
light
chlorophyll

  6CO2 + 6H2O                        6O2 + C6H12O6

light
chlorophyll

Where does Photosynthesis Occur?
Inside of chloroplasts which are located in cells of the green parts of plants

Chloroplast Structure
Disks called THYLAKOIDS contain the pigment CHLOROPHYLL


The liquid portion of a chloroplast is the STROMA








Photosynthesis
The light reaction occurs in the grana and must have light to occur. 
 
The dark reaction (Calvin Cycle) occurs in the stroma.  

Light Reactions - (the “photo” part of photosynthesis)

Occur in the thylakoids
Can only occur in the presence of light
Convert solar energy to chemical energy

Calvin Cycle - the “synthesis” part of photosynthesis
Occur in the stroma
Can occur in the presence of light or dark
Glucose is made

Calvin Cycle
CO2 enters the cycle and leaves as sugar.
The cycle spends the energy of ATP and NADPH to make the sugar.


Factors Affecting Photosynthesis
Intensity of light
 high light, high rate 
Carbon dioxide concentration
 high CO2, high rate
Temperature
A certain range works best, too hot or too cold affects the work of enzymes


Questions 32-37

Respiration

Energy is Stored in ATP
Adenosine Triphosphate
ATP releases energy when the bonds between the phosphates are broken 

Cellular Respiration
the breakdown of glucose molecules to form ATP
Cellular respiration releases the energy in food to make ATP, a form of energy our cells can use 
Occurs in the mitochondria 

C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O +  ATP

Does this equation look familiar? 



Aerobic Respiration
IN THE PRESENCE OF OXYGEN

	36 Total ATP are produced


GLYCOLYSIS
First Step of Cellular Respiration 

Glycolysis
Glyco → glucose 
Lysis → split 

The splitting of glucose into two pyruvates 
Occurs in the cytoplasm 
2 ATP


KREBS CYCLE
Second Step of Cellular Respiration 

Krebs Cycle
Pyruvate enters the mitochondrion
Kreb’s cycle produces CO2 and ATP 
2 ATP are produced (one for every pyruvate) 


Krebs Cycle
The Krebs Cycle can almost be described as a chain reaction. 
It is a biochemical pathway because the product of one reaction becomes the reactant of the next.

Krebs Cycle
The Krebs Cycle produces CO2 and ATP

It also produces electron carriers NADH and FADH2, which will carry electrons to the electron transport chain 

ELECTRON TRANSPORT CHAIN
Third Step of Cellular Respiration 

Electron Transport Chain - 32 ATP

Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain is a sequence of membrane proteins on the inner mitochondrial membrane that shuttle electrons during the reactions that release energy used to make ATP


Electron Transport Chain
At the end of the electron transport chain, hydrogen ions (H+) and electrons combine with O2 molecules to make H2O

Anaerobic Respiration
WITHOUT THE PRESENCE OF OXYGEN



Fermentation 
Without oxygen, the electron transport chain does not function 
Fermentation releases energy from food, producing ATP, without using oxygen. Instead, the electron carriers NAD+/NADH are recycled. 
Not as efficient as aerobic respiration (less ATP is produced) 
Occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell 


Alcohol Fermentation 
Produces ethyl alcohol and carbon dioxide 
Occurs in yeast and other microorganisms 


Lactic Acid Fermentation 
Produces lactic acid 
Occurs in muscles 


Questions 38-44

Kahoot Review
https://create.kahoot.it/details/19b081ed-a693-400d-9aa3-abc24bd771f9


